<a id="licenses"></a>
# Licenses

This documentation and associated software is subject to the following licenses.

<a id="license-documentation"></a>

## Documentation License

This documentation in any form, software or printed matter, contains proprietary
information that is the exclusive property of Couchbase. Your access to and use
of this material is subject to the terms and conditions of your Couchbase
Software License and Service Agreement, which has been executed and with which
you agree to comply. This document and information contained herein may not be
disclosed, copied, reproduced, or distributed to anyone outside Couchbase
without prior written consent of Couchbase or as specifically provided below.
This document is not part of your license agreement nor can it be incorporated
into any contractual agreement with Couchbase or its subsidiaries or affiliates.

Use of this documentation is subject to the following terms:

You may create a printed copy of this documentation solely for your own personal
use. Conversion to other formats is allowed as long as the actual content is not
altered or edited in any way. You shall not publish or distribute this
documentation in any form or on any media, except if you distribute the
documentation in a manner similar to how Couchbase disseminates it (that is,
electronically for download on a Web site with the software) or on a CD-ROM or
similar medium, provided however that the documentation is disseminated together
with the software on the same medium. Any other use, such as any dissemination
of printed copies or use of this documentation, in whole or in part, in another
publication, requires the prior written consent from an authorized
representative of Couchbase. Couchbase and/or its affiliates reserve any and all
rights to this documentation not expressly granted above.

This documentation may provide access to or information on content, products,
and services from third parties. Couchbase Inc. and its affiliates are not
responsible for and expressly disclaim all warranties of any kind with respect
to third-party content, products, and services. Couchbase Inc. and its
affiliates will not be responsible for any loss, costs, or damages incurred due
to your access to or use of third-party content, products, or services.

The information contained herein is subject to change without notice and is not
warranted to be error free. If you find any errors, please report them to us in
writing.

<a id="licenses-community"></a>

## Couchbase, Inc. Community Edition License Agreement

IMPORTANT-READ CAREFULLY: BY CLICKING THE "I ACCEPT" BOX OR INSTALLING,
DOWNLOADING OR OTHERWISE USING THIS SOFTWARE AND ANY ASSOCIATED DOCUMENTATION,
YOU, ON BEHALF OF YOURSELF OR AS AN AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE ON BEHALF OF AN
ENTITY ("LICENSEE") AGREE TO ALL THE TERMS OF THIS COMMUNITY EDITION LICENSE
AGREEMENT (THE "AGREEMENT") REGARDING YOUR USE OF THE SOFTWARE. YOU REPRESENT
AND WARRANT THAT YOU HAVE FULL LEGAL AUTHORITY TO BIND THE LICENSEE TO THIS
AGREEMENT. IF YOU DO NOT AGREE WITH ALL OF THESE TERMS, DO NOT SELECT THE "I
ACCEPT" BOX AND DO NOT INSTALL, DOWNLOAD OR OTHERWISE USE THE SOFTWARE. THE
EFFECTIVE DATE OF THIS AGREEMENT IS THE DATE ON WHICH YOU CLICK "I ACCEPT" OR
OTHERWISE INSTALL, DOWNLOAD OR USE THE SOFTWARE.

 1. License Grant. Couchbase Inc. hereby grants Licensee, free of charge, the
    non-exclusive right to use, copy, merge, publish, distribute, sublicense, and/or
    sell copies of the Software, and to permit persons to whom the Software is
    furnished to do so, subject to Licensee including the following copyright notice
    in all copies or substantial portions of the Software:

     ```
     Couchbase Â©
     http://www.couchbase.com
     Copyright 2014 Couchbase, Inc.
     ```

    As used in this Agreement, "Software" means the object code version of the
    applicable elastic data management server software provided by Couchbase, Inc.

 1. Support. Couchbase, Inc. will provide Licensee with access to, and use of, the
    Couchbase, Inc. support forum available at the following URL:
    http://forums.membase.org. Couchbase, Inc. may, at its discretion, modify,
    suspend or terminate support at any time upon notice to Licensee.

 1. Warranty Disclaimer and Limitation of Liability. THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS
    IS," WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED
    TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND
    NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL COUCHBASE INC. OR THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT
    HOLDERS IN THE SOFTWARE BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES (INCLUDING, WITHOUT
    LIMITATION, DIRECT, INDIRECT OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES) OR OTHER LIABILITY,
    WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN
    CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.

